1. samples that passed SNP-QC were considered for CNV analysis

We individually inspected all individuals who were marked as “male”
but with significant amount of heterozygous X genotypes (>=1%), or who
were marked as “female” but with high frequency of homozygous X
genotypes (>=80%) or Y genotype readings using the original data
source. If no satisfactory correction could be obtained, these
individuals were excluded from further analyses. In total we excluded
3 Munich control participants, 5 Aberdeen cases, and 2 Aberdeen
control participants in this step.

The CNV calls were generated using the PennCNV software (version
2008jun26 version [62]) using the Log R ratio (LRR) and B allele
frequency (BAF) measures automatically computed from the signal
intensity files by BeadStudio, and the standard hg18 ‘‘all’’ PennCNV
hidden Markov model (hmm) and population frequency of B allele (pfb)
files for the 317 and 550 BeadChips. For the samples genotyped on the
610-Quad BeadChips, we used the hh550_610.hg18 pfb and gc model files
separately provided by Dr. Kai Wang to ensure inclusion of all
CNV-specific markers. Because many of the samples had below optimal
genomic wave QC values, for Aberdeen and Munich we implemented the gc
model wave adjustment procedure. We used the PennCNV checks to exclude
samples that failed quality control.  These included samples that had
a LRR standard deviation > .0.28, BAF median > .0.55 or < 0.45, BAF
drift > .0.002 or WF > 0.04 or < - 0.04. For the US cohort we found an
excess of CNVs in samples with LRR_SD values between 0.25 and 0.28, so
the LRR_SD cut-off was reduced to 0.25 for both cases and controls
from the US. All samples that failed QC after the wave adjustment
procedure were removed. Due to the complications of hemizy- gosity in
males and X-chromosome inactivation in females, all analyses were
restricted to autosomes. Additionally, to ensure that we were working
with high-confidence CNVs, we excluded any CNV for which the
difference of the log likelihood of the most likely copy number state
and the less likely copy number state was less than 10 (generated
using the -conf function in PennCNV). Finally, some centromeric and
telomeric regions are not well mapped, and this can potentially result
in CNV-calling errors in these regions (Dr. Kai Wang, personal
communication). Also, genomic regions coding for immunoglobulin genes
have previously been shown to be potential sites of false-positive
PennCNV calls [62]. Our own research has shown that calls in both of
these types of region differed significantly depending on the sample
type used for DNA extraction (significant difference p < 10^-10 for
deletion and/or duplication frequencies between samples genotyped on
DNA extracted from blood or saliva, data not shown). We therefore
excluded any CNV that overlapped any of the following regions by 50%
or more of its length: chr2: 87.0–92.0, chr14: 18– 23.6 Mb, chr14:
104.5–106.5 Mb, chr15: 17.0–21.0, chr16: 31.8– 36.0 Mb, chr22:
20.5–21.8 Mb (immunoglobin regions); chr1:0– 4 Mb, 240–247 Mb; chr2:
87.0–92.0 Mb; chr4: 0–1.43 Mb, 48.75–49 Mb, 190.7–191.3 Mb; chr7:0–200
kb, 56.5–62.5 Mb; chr8: 39–45 Mb, 145–146.3 Mb; chr9: 44.5–70.1 Mb;
138– 140.2 Mb; chr10: 38.5–42 Mb, 134–135.4 Mb; chr11: 0– 1.8 Mb;
chr14: 18–23.6 Mb, 104.5–106.5 Mb; chr15: 17.0– 21.100–100.3 Mb;
chr16: 0–2.1 Mb, 31.8–36.0 Mb, 86.6– 88.9 Mb; chr17:0–1 Mb, 76.5–78.8
Mb; chr18: 14–16 Mb, 75.5–76 Mb; chr19: 0–2.1 Mb, 25.7–28.3 Mb,
61.5–62.5 Mb; chr20: 25.7–28.3 Mb, 61.5–62.5 Mb; chr21:9.7–14.3 Mb;
chr22:14.4–14.7 Mb, 20.5–21.8 Mb (centromeric and telomeric regions,
some overlapping immunoglobin regions as above). We also removed CNVs
that spanned centromeres by searching for those larger than 1 Mb with
fewer than 50 SNPs and checking their genomic locations.

 We also employed a ‘‘one percent rule’’ that discarded from analysis
 any SNP that had more than 1% of samples that could not be reliably
 scored, to reduce the scope for spurious association.
